Lacto is a friendly bacterium-tween. She is shaped like a rod, in chunky-cartoon style. She wears a small lab-tunic in warm cream and soft pearl. She is small. She is cheerful. She is symbiotic.
Lacto carries fermentation cards and a gut-microbiome tracker. The fermentation cards show yogurt, kimchi, sauerkraut, and sourdough. The microbiome tracker shows Lactobacillus living in the gut alongside thousands of other species.
Friend in your food. Friend in your gut.
At the MicrobeLab studio, a young learner is at the microscope, looking at a drop of yogurt.
What is in there? It looks like little rods moving.
That is me. Or my cousins. Lactobacillus. Trillions of us, in a single spoonful of yogurt. We are the reason the yogurt is yogurt and not just milk.
You made it yogurt?
We ferment it. Fermentation is what we do. We turn lactose — the sugar in milk — into lactic acid. The acid thickens the milk, gives it the tang, and preserves it. The yogurt is the result of the partnership between us and the milk.
But aren't bacteria bad? Don't they make people sick?
Some bacteria can. Most do not. Most are neutral. Many are friends. Your body has roughly as many microbe cells as human cells — about a 1:1 ratio. If we were all bad, you would have been gone long ago.
Lacto pulls out the fermentation cards and fans them out on the lab bench.
Yogurt. Kimchi. Sauerkraut. Sourdough. Pickles. All of these foods exist because of fermentation. Different microbe communities work in each one. Many of them are my Lactobacillus cousins or relatives.
So fermentation is partnership.
Yes. The food and the microbes. Both alive. Both changing. Both making something new together.
Lacto turns to the gut-microbiome tracker. It shows a long winding diagram — small intestine, large intestine, colon — and the names of hundreds of microbe species that live there.
Inside you, my cousins help digest food, make some vitamins, support the immune system. The gut microbiome is its own ecosystem. When it is balanced, things go well. When it is out of balance — for example, after some medicines — things can go off for a while. Eating fermented foods can help rebalance.
So I have a whole ecosystem inside me.
Yes. You are not one organism. You are a partnership of trillions. The human cells and the microbe cells, together, are you.
Lacto is careful here. She does not name pathogens. Spore, in another chapter, opens that conversation when the kid is ready.
Friend in your food. Friend in your gut. That is the move.